---
layout: post
title: "Culture Wars and Epistemic Modesty"
date: 2020-11-30
tags: miscellaneous takes
---
A few days ago, there was a rather curious incident at my alma mater that popped up onto the [national headlines](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/11/26/exclusive-eton-college-dismisses-teacher-amid-free-speech-row/): that of a teacher being dismissed, supposedly due to his views being out of line with the "radical feminist orthodoxy" (whatever that actually means). The reaction and backlash was near spontaneous - hundreds of members of the Eton community signed a [petition opposing his dismissal](https://www.gopetition.com/petitions/letter-from-boys-to-provost-about-mr-knowland.html), and even the likes of Steven Pinker came forward with [a letter to the Provost](https://twitter.com/JamesLYucel/status/1332345546183503872) arguing against the dismissal and for "the honest and rigorous discussion of ideas". [The letter by the teacher, Mr Knowland](https://twitter.com/JamesLYucel/status/1332354193726853125), only fanned the flames. 

Effectively, his side of the story went as follows: he had produced "a lecture on the theme of masculinity for the Perspectives course". This is a lecture series at Eton designed to get students to "think critically and independently about controversial issues that are the subject of ongoing public debate". In this, he had made the case that "men and women differ psychologically and not all of those differences were socially constructed", as well as arguing that "the current radical feminist orthodoxy [insists] that there's something fundamentally toxic about masculinity". Having been asked by the headmaster to remove this lecture video from the course, he did so - but he refused to take it down from his personal Youtube account because he was not "given a clear reason". He goes on to outline his belief "in free speech" and opposition to the "cancel culture" that has now come to Eton.

On first glance, this seems like a classic free speech culture war issue. As everyone no doubt acknowledges, there are limits on free speech - after all, why is asking a hitman to assassinate someone a crime? You don't yourself engage in the murder, and yet we consider this an acceptable limit on speech because we see that this particular act of speech has consequences. So the question isn't whether we should limit it, as much as where we draw the line, especially in an educational establishment? The student petition suggested that with "at least 41 academic citations", "the ideas in [Mr Knowland's] video [were presented] with as much academic nuance and sensitivity as could ever be reasonably expected", and did not "[step] out of the realms of academic debate and into genuinely discriminatory private opinion". 

**The Limits of Speech**

Unfortunately, this line of argumentation falls short in several key respects. Firstly, the actual analytical rigour of the video is itself lacking, such that even as a pedagogical tool its value is questionable. Secondly, this fails to recognise the dynamics of platforming content when there is a time constraint, as there is in the Perspectives course. Thirdly, it ignores the actual reason for dismissal - that is, the responsibilities and rights of employees in their private lives. 

On the first, it is hopefully clear to most that citation counts are no measure of academic or analytical rigour. Indeed, anyone who has watched the video in full will have noticed the abundant use of rather informal anecdotes and assertions, in lieu of any attempt at a literature review of the field. There is also a certain motte-and-bailey feeling to the whole thing, insofar as the video contains claims ranging from the reasonably uncontroversial to downright illogical claims made on the basis of pop culture references to the Avengers. Secondly, we need to appreciate the context in which this occurred. The Perspectives course, at least when I did it, involved doing a lecture on a different topic every week. That means it is more than likely this would have been the only lecture the boys are exposed to regarding gender and its role in modern society. It's not immediately apparent to me that spending most of that time on content on the grounds that it is non-mainstream is a good use of the lecture series, especially when it is so insufficiently substantiated.

To go on a brief but important tangent, one of my favourite television shows of all time is *The Newsroom*. One of the most striking quotes from the show is this: "bias towards fairness means that if the entire congressional Republican caucus were to walk in to the House and propose a resolution stating that the Earth was flat, the Times would lead with Democrats and Republicans Can't Agree on Shape of Earth". Not all stories have two sides. And when they do, those two sides may not be equally credible. As President Obama noted in a [recent interview](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/11/why-obama-fears-for-our-democracy/617087/), "if we do not have the capacity to distinguish what’s true from what’s false, then by definition the marketplace of ideas doesn’t work". The idea that we should be contributing to an epistemic crisis by having teachers deliberately lend credence to nonsense because it is important to have ideological balance is patently absurd. Consider climate change denial, which is very much a non-mainstream opinion. Climate change is a pertinent issue. And yet I would struggle to see the value in spending an entire Perspectives talk about climate change on arguments for climate change denial, because it represents a view with such weak intellectual foundations and limited academic support that to do so would confer unfounded merit towards these claims. To the extent to which it is important to address climate change denial, it seems incumbent upon educational establishments to do so in fashion that accurately reflects the evidence that exists i.e. to dismiss it and comprehensively refute it, spending most of the talk on the evidence-based disagreements regarding possible solutions.

Many will argue that much of what Mr Knowland was saying isn't nearly as disprovable as climate change denial - this may well be the case, but that doesn't change the fact that his lecture basically presents a single perspective. Unless you believe this is the only true or even plausible claim around the role of gender and the patriarchy, this strikes me as just not good enough for a Perspectives talk. But maybe you still aren't persuaded that the role of Perspectives should be to keep arguments grounded in reality - perhaps it's really just about finding the most contrarian claims that the boys will disagree with and can thus examine? Having been involved with the Feminism Society at Eton, I am inclined to believe that the vast majority of Etonians do not subscribe to the "radical feminist orthodoxy" that is supposedly so prevalent, making a feminist perspective exactly what would be most provocative. So even in that metric, the contents of this Perspective lecture do not hold up.

As for the third criticism, it is worth noting that Mr Knowland wasn't dismissed for the initial video. He was dismissed because he refused to take down his video from his personal Youtube channel. I remember the white supremacist protests in Charlottesville - and I remember the doxxing that followed, where the identities of some of those who attended and supported these protests were publicised. In some cases, this resulted in them being dismissed from their place of work. Is this mob justice? Or is this simply the proliferation of information and transparency allowing for an accountability mechanism? I'm not entirely sure myself - but I am pretty certain that if you think it is acceptable for white supremacists to be fired by their employers for attending these rallies in their private lives, you are implicitly conceding that employers can take actions on the basis of a sphere of your life beyond the workplace. And although the sorts of claims made by white supremacists are substantially different from what Mr Knowland was discussing, the principle remains the same. As such, this is not just a generic free speech issue, but one where the external reputation and standing of the school is on the line.

**Epistemic Modesty**

This brings me on to my most important issue with all of the discourse up to this point. And it is the fact that the litany of complaints and the enormous outrage I have seen so far are almost entirely based on Mr Knowland's account of what happened. Mr Knowland taught me English in Year 10. He was an excellent teacher, and by all accounts from other students, a good person. So I understand why one's immediate inclination is that of believing his narrative and consequently of righteous anger. But this hastiness towards judgement is a frankly embarrassing display of epistemic arrogance. Does anyone really think that any school, let alone one that is so often in the public eye, is going to randomly dismiss employees without checking with their legal team? Is it really plausible that this was done without any cause given at all? For a school that has hosted such a wide range of speakers in recent years, including the likes of Sir Roger Scruton, Niall Ferguson and Nigel Biggar, is it that compelling to believe that this plurality of opinions is being stifled in such a public fashion? Perhaps all of these things are happening - but it seemed and still seems prudent to at least wait and get more information.

So it is no surprise that the [response from the Provost](https://twitter.com/tmychow/status/1333204255386316800/photo/1) which came out yesterday has challenged many of Mr Knowland's claims. It suggests that the specific cause for restricting Mr Knowland's Youtube channel was not a nefarious one, but simply "a temporary removal" to give time for the school to conduct its full due diligence, given the legal advice received that the video might have "[broken] the Equality Act and the Education Regulations". He goes on to say that Mr Knowland was asked "on six occasions" to do so, and it was his "persistent refusal to accept a reasonable - and inevitable - instruction", rather than "the lesson content alone", that "amounted to gross misconduct which should result in dismissal".

Let me be clear. Just as we ought not believe everything Mr Knowland says, nor should we take this response at face value. And that is precisely the point. In the eagerness to tie this into a wider narrative around the "woke culture", many have decided to ignore the messy nuances that inevitably arise as part of any discussion on the limits of speech (especially in an educational context), as well as failing to stop and consider if the information they might have is incomplete. The letter from the Provost shows the dangers of this. And since there is an internal appeals process yet to come, as well as the possibility of a hearing at an employment tribunal, the details we have so far are a very limited fraction of what actually happened - indeed, I am myself unclear on how the video breached the laws cited by the Provost. As Jed Bartlet notes in *The West Wing*, "every once in a while, there's a day with an absolute right and an absolute wrong. But those days almost always include body counts. Other than that, there aren't very many unnuanced moments". The nature and limits of free speech, the role of teachers, the relations of employers and employees - these are topics that are far too complex even with all the information. And in this case, we don't have all the information - and so it would behove all of us to be a bit more epistemically modest.

Edit 1: This is honestly a hilarious example of why this stuff matters: turns out [Steven Pinker didn't watch the video](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-9002965/Fired-Eton-master-said-half-rape-allegations-FAKED.html) before commenting and sending his letter of support... 

Edit 2: Here's a transcript of the video I've typed up myself. Please do point out any errors or inconsistencies.

Patriarchy is a theory that says the differences between the sexes and their social roles are not the result of biology. Instead, they are socially constructed and they have resulted in the pervasiveness of male domination in women's lives. This idea of male domination has led the Good Lads Initiative to claim the tradition ideas of masculinity need to be reimagined, but it has also led according to Doris Lessing, the novelist and feminist icon, to an unthinking and automatic rubbishing of men, which is now so part of our culture that it is hardly even noticed. Despite this rubbishing of men however, the Marvel movies show that in popular culture, masculine archetypes such as Captain America, Thor and Iron Man, described by the philosopher Edward Feser as "a patriotic soldier", "the son of a heavenly father come to Earth" and "a strutting capitalist alpha male", retain their appeal. People are watching surprisingly traditional masculine archetypes - nobody wants to watch films about characters like this (shows a sexualised caricature of a non-binary superhero in video). And one of the best established findings of modern psychology is that greater gender equality in a society leads to greater gravitation towards traditional gender norms. In the literature on this topic, sex is the biological distinction between male and female, whereas gender is how the difference between male and female is shaped by culture. So researchers have termed this result "the patriarchy paradox". Shaping men and women culturally to be more similar actually exaggerates their differences. It is the opposite of what the social constructivist theory predicted - but it isn't paradoxical if patriarchy is, rather than being merely socially constructed, partly based in biology. Contrary to the claim that patriarchy is about male domination of women, it also at least partly results from women's choices, because it benefits them. 

Much of what follows might bruise the feelings of some people, so here from the philosopher Stephen Hicks is a reminder of the elements of the traditional arguments for freedom of speech. Reason is essential for knowing reality, it's a function of the individual, we need the freedom to think, to criticise and to debate, and this is also of value not just to ourselves but to other members of our society as well.
 
In a cross-cultural study of manhood, David Gilmore, Professor of Anthropology, concluded that three moral injunctions come repeatedly into focus: one must impregnate women, protect dependents from danger and provision kith and kin. None of these three roles, procreate, protect, provide, is exclusively masculine - but the protector role is the least shared, making it the core of masculinity. It is the least shared, because it is the one most firmly rooted in anatomy and physiology. Even in lion prides, this is very clear - although lionesses do 90% of the providing, the males are responsible for protecting the pride. They only help kill the largest, most dangerous prey that would otherwise cost the lives of too many lionesses. Accordingly, in all cultures, war has usually been men's work. It is Gilmore's universal protector role. In mythology, this is embodied by Thor, who because of his physical strength, alone stood between Asgard and destruction. By contrast, women have very rarely fought, and no country has ever obliged women to fight. The advanced weaponry of the modern age hasn't made much difference. When the Russian army went to war in Chechnya in 1994-1995, its female officers, roughly 14% of the officer corp, simply refused to go. Knowing the outcry that would follow, the army did not force them to. Female Israeli soldiers, despite mandatory military service, do not join frontline combat infantry brigades. The equipment is often heavy, making it hard for women to carry around, and sometimes it goes wrong. Michael Fitzmaurice on the right there served for the US in Vietnam - a grenade hit the tank he was in with his fellow soldiers. He had to get two of them, wounded, out of the tank, and then another grenade broke his rifle. He killed an enemy soldier with his bare hands, took his rifle, and then managed to escape. War has usually been men's work because men, as a result of natural sex differences that aren't socially constructed, are physically adapted to fighting. 

Recognising that gender roles would be less fluid if sex differences are natural, some feminist theorists such as Judith Butler have argued that not only gender but sex itself is socially constructed, claiming that intersex people, or people with only an X chromosome or XXY chromosomes, show sex isn't binary or natural. The biologist Emma Hilton however, has described the idea that sex is a social construct as false at every conceivable scale of resolution. Sex isn't defined by chromosomes. In all species, even those with different or no chromosomes, females produce large gamete reproductive cells and males produce small ones. There is no third immediate gamete size. Intersex people are not exceptions, and the philosopher David Burn has pointed out that there would have been sexes in plants and animals even if there were no human societies, and therefore nothing socially constructed at all. Some philosophers pointed out that logically, considerations that support transgenderism would support transspeciesism, but we all recognise that there are limits to what we can identify as. Species for example aren't social constructs. People who identify as lizards aren't actually lizards. Similarly, if you are biologically male but identify as female, Hilton says, you still have small gametes. (Picture of "We All Have Our Own Truth and "We All Have Our Own Laws of Physics") 

So, what natural sex differences are relevant to the protector role? The shoulders of boys and girls are equally broad until adolescence. Then at puberty, the shoulder cartilage cells respond to testosterone, the male sex hormone newly produced by the testes, by growing. Pubertal girls by contrast get wider hips when their hip cartilage cells respond to estrogen, the female sex hormone. The sudden acceleration of shoulder width in boys is associated with relative enlargement of the upper arm muscles. The result is that men have far greater upper body muscle mass and strength than women. Men also have 4% faster nerve transmission speed. A major marine corp study found that women are at a significant disadvantage in combat compared to men - even untrained males outperform trained females. The Amazonian warrior women are merely a myth for a reason. And the adaptations are not merely physical - men are more violent by temperament, which Wrangham, Professor of Anthropology at Harvard, observes that the 5 million year long trail to our modern selves is lined along its full stretch by a male aggression that instructed our ancestor's social lives, technology and minds. Some scientists have argued that early humans first stood up to fight, and that fighting shaped the evolution of the hand. But aren't some women strong and don't some women also fight? Yes. But look at what Tamikka Brents said after her skull was fractured by the transgender MMA fighter Fallon Fox: "I am an abnormally strong women in my own right, but I have never felt strength I felt in a fight like that night. I don't think it's fair". If it's not fair to put men in the ring with women for sports, it's not fair to pit men against women on the battlefield either.

War has also usually been men's work, because they can afford to treat their lives more cheaply. From a biological point of view, the female role is primary. A population can survive the loss of men more easily than that of women. In 2008, ecologists Rebecca Sear and Ruth Mace published a paper called "Who Keeps Children Alive?". Across 28 cultures, the answer was that many mothers do. A mother's death was more likely to lead to a child's death, especially among nursing infants. For the same reasons, physical strength, greater aggression, relative expandability, the protector role goes beyond warfare to include protection against the destructive forces of nature. In Charlotte Perkins Gilman's 1915 utopian novel Herland, in which all the men are killed by a volcanic eruption and the women discover a miraculous procedure for stimulating virgin birth, wild beasts are conveniently absent. But a world without men would be awful for women. Mining, oil extraction, heavy and chemical industry, long distance transportation, most forms of construction, many kinds of agriculture such as forestry and the herding of large domestic animals would all but cease. So would deep sea fishing. Under such conditions, over 90% of the world's present day population would die of starvation. The women that survive such a calamity would likely revert to a primitive life based on horticulture, dwelling in huts and suffering from a permanent shortage of animal protein. Judging by historical and pre-historical precedent, their life expectancy would be reduced to less than 40 years. 

Throughout history, women have always been spared the worst work. Only male slaves were conscripted to die in the thousands for the pyramids, the canals in the ancient Middle East, the Great Wall of China and the roads, industrial scale cornmills and colosseum in Rome. Even in mythology, there is no female equivalent to Sisyphus. And men invented well over 90% of the inventions that have improved women's life expectancy and quality of life. Some common objections to this protector idea are the witch hunts, the coverture laws, the vote and rape. Marianne Hester for example claims the witchhunts were about men trying to suppress female sexuality, patriarchal power at its most tyrannical. But most accusers were women, Mary enacted the Scottish witchcraft laws and persecution reached its apex under Elizabeth, who reinstated all the penalties against witchcraft that Edward VI, 16 years earlier, had repealed acting on the advice of his all-male entourage. Furthermore, the fewer women involved in the trials, the fairer the treatment the witches were likely to receive. The coverture laws are claimed to show patriarchal oppression of women because they prevented women from owning property. But the married couple was regarded as one legal entity - the husband assumed responsibility for his wife debt's, including his pre-marital ones. He could even be imprisoned on her behalf, while she was immune to prosecution. Regarding the vote, women have always had it at the local level, in both parish and manor, and only 4% of the male population had the vote in ancient Athens, which remained a historical high until mid-19th century England. Even as the year 1918 began, it was still the case that well under 50% of adult men had a usable national vote. Unlike women, all these men shouldered some form of taxation without representation, and they could also be conscripted to bear arms. Lastly, rape is not a unique claim for male oppression of women, because male-on-male rape in jails dwarves male-on-female rape outside of them. 

Not only do the most common objections to the idea that women are protected fail, but numerous recent studies provide strong evidence for it. Kary Mullis, chemistry Nobel Prize laureate, says "it doesn't take a lot of education to check things out. All it takes is access to resources and the feeling that people might be trying to put something over on you". So I did some truth-sleuthing and managed to uncover the following: people prefer to spare the lives of females over the lives of males, which sounds like male expendability. They are also less willing to harm females than males, and perceive male aggression as more unacceptable. This sounds like women are protected and privileged. Women are punished less than men for the same crime. That's odd in a patriarchy with oppressive laws. They are also more likely to be hired for STEM jobs than male applicants. And people want to support social action to correct female underrepresentation more than they do male underrepresentation.

In response to this evidence which puts the claim that society is characterised by male oppression of women into reasonable doubt, a desperate, bizarre objection is that chivalry itself is oppressive, that Chief Justice MC Chagla somehow oppressed women by ruling it lawful under the constitution of India to discriminate in favour of women against men, but not in favour of men against women. It is worth remembering here that the overwhelming majority of women don't describe themselves as feminists - as few as 8% in Germany. According to the Education Research Center, one of the characteristics of indoctrination is a closed system, meaning immunity to criticism (shows comic on students being told "white men are evil" in calculus class). All data must conform to the theory of patriarchal oppression. Women who don't feel oppressed have just been oppressed into believing they're free to keep them oppressed. To use Karl Popper's term, patriarchy is non-falsifiable. Suppose as GK Chesterton put it, "you have a theory that all ginger people are trying to kill you. When you ask them whether they are, they say they're not - but you're too clever for them. That's exactly what they would say". Your system is closed. There simply is sexism, patriarchal oppression and toxic masculinity everywhere, even in the structure of skyscrapers. As Elizabeth Anscombe pointed out however, "corrupt minds cannot be reasoned with". 

The protector role is universal. What virtues does it require? Because he faces great risks and must therefore overcome fear, the protector requires courage. Beginning in infancy and across all different kinds of culture, men are less prone to fear than women are. Women self-report greater fear of crime, public speaking, accidents, darkness, cancer, heights and high-risk mutual funds. Lab studies back this up - women have a stronger reflex reaction to fearful scenes, they startle more violently, their hearts race faster and they sweat more. Although less prone to fear than women are, men are not however fearless. The average soldier on the battlefield regresses and acts passively under enemy fire. Commanding officers sometimes have to force men to fight at gunpoint. Phobos, or fear, was the god of the battlefield for the ancient Greeks. Worldwide, various masculine rites of passage therefore aim at the development of courage, tempering and toughening the initiates. They differ, but they all test a boy's ability to handle pain and fear. Feminists such as Eleanor Leacock have said the !Kung bushmen in Botswana represent an ideal of sexual equality, offering them as a model for the west. But even the boys there have to kill an antelope to become men, showing they are providers rather than mere consumers of meat. They are also subjected to a severe form of hazing involving grueling tests of masculine stamina. The boys must man up. "Tonight I have taken all that I was and strangled him that pale lily-white lad. I have choked him with these my hands these claws catching him as he lay a-dreaming in his bed. Then chuckling I dragged out his foolish brains that were full of pretty love-tales heighho the holly, and emptied them holus bolus to the drains those dreams of love, oh what ruinous folly. He is dead pale youth and he shall not rise on the third day or any other day, sloughed like a snakeskin there he lies and he shall not trouble me again for aye" (shows faces of soldiers while reading the poem). 

The Good Lads Initiative claims the phrase "man up" is meaningless. In procreating, providing and protecting, men can fail in a way women can't. In procreation, they can fail in a very visual and humiliating way by being impotent. On the island of Truk, women laugh at a man's sexual failure, telling him to take the breast like a baby. In providing, they can fail to kill the animal - unlike roots and berries traditionally gathered by women, large and dangerous animals fight back or run away. And in protecting, the urge to succumb to fear is almost overwhelming. The ground at the Hot Gates were slick with feces and urine. Men wet themselves in the boats on D-Day. Childbirth, it is true, demands great courage of women, but you can't lose childbirth by running away. Here we see in Hector's lines before he goes to face Achilles that it's a combination of biology and culture that goes to make up masculinity. "I've learned it" - it's something that is cultivated. This is his duty given his biological status as a man. His culture has shaped him to live up to the responsibilities that that entails. He has to overcome fear. We see the same idea in this clip from 300, when the soldiers talk about having to earn their shields, live up to the ideal (plays a clip from 300). The Good Lads Initiative claims that the phrase man up is meaningless. I wonder what King Leonidas would have thoughts of that idea.

Closely related to courage is honour - the concern to protect one's reputation and that of one's family and lineage, pointing to the need to establish and defend boundaries. Only male honour is inseparable from strength and courage. Calling a woman a wimp isn't really an insult. And Campbell, in her studies of aggression in female adolescents, found that physical fights were rare, but they usually began with girls calling each other sluts, slags or whores. Season 3 Episode 6 of Sex In The City is called "Are We Sluts?". This is because women's honour is tied to ancient standards of sexual propriety. These insults advertise women's propensity to be unfaithful, and therefore make men less likely to consider her as a potential partner. Calling a man a slut would probably just provoke a confused look. Women mostly harm each other with words and behind the back, rather than face to face, using gossip to alienate and defame. You can't prove chastity in a fight (shows video of a man unwilling to get into a fight). Apart from fighting, sport and games are a public display of men's fitness to defend boundaries. Boys are around 50 times more likely than girls to engage in games involving direct head-to-head competition. Adult men are also more interested in competition, broadcasting who is stronger, fitter and abler to the community at large. Men compete harder and perform better when women are watching. And women often instigate the competition, as among the Mursi of Ethiopia, where they start stick-fighting contests among the young men and lavish their attention on the winners. Male athletes aren't motivated by dominating female athletes though - the dominance contests apparent between males of all species and females of some species are within, not across, sexes. Biologically speaking, the idea that men exert power over women is nonsense. Across species, females can exploit their power of sexual choice to get males to compete in ways that do things for them (shows video of collisions in American football).

In most species, the female could refuse the dominant male if they chose - but they don't. An elephant seal cow will cry out in protest if a low ranking male tries to mate with her, summoning all the males within earshot to fight over her. And human women prefer the smell of dominant males, more masculine male faces and men behaving more dominantly when at peak fertility than at other times in their menstrual cycle. This is because ovulation makes women desire a strong protector - pregnancy and childbirth make them vulnerable, and it is wishful thinking to believe that boundaries can be established and defended without violence and the values of strength, courage and honour that accompany it. George Orwell expressed this hard truth: "those who adjure violence can only do so because others are committing violence on their behalf". You might think that a real man prizes showing vulnerability and talking about his feelings, or wearing rainbow laces, but he can't do that if he's dead. In this clip from Goodfellas, this character's girlfriend has just been sexually assaulted by a neighbour, and here he is about to seek revenge on her behalf (shows clip of a man violently attacking a neighbour). Wasn't that violent? Wouldn't it be lovely if we could get rid of violence? Well, in attempting to vanquish violence and oppression from the earth, Marxists broke all records for mass slaughter, murdering over 100 million people. Male aggression is a biological fact that will be with us, whether we like it or not. Some people think that nowadays, we don't need violence because we have the law. But in fact the law itself ultimately depends on the threat of violence (shows comic book character Bane threatening someone's life). When Bane's hand touches his shoulder after he says he is in charge, he realises that he is not really in charge, because he can't back that up. And without violence, laws are ultimately just words.

Now the traditional ideal of chivalry is the attempt to deal with the fact of biological aggression among men. The virtue of chivalry is the virtue of one who has internalised the ethos of the protector - courage, prowess in battle, mercy to the vanquished, courtesy towards women, gentleness towards children and piety towards elders. Machismo, by constrast, is the defamation of chivalry, for men who forget that their strength is to be put in the service of the weak. The feminist's horrified reaction to domestic violence acknowledges men's special duty towards women. It is far, far worse for a man to beat up a woman, than it is for him to beat up a weaker man. What's interesting here is that the idea of toxic masculinity, to the extent that it's true, isn't new - it was already there, in the concept of machismo versus chivalry. So what's true isn't new, and what's new isn't true. Anthropologists have never found a genuine matriarchy - as Wrangham explains, patriarchy is worldwide and history-wide, and its origins are detectable in the social lives of chimpanzees. It has its ultimate origins in male violence, but it doesn't come from man alone, and it has its sources in the evolutionary interests of both sexes. This study shows that these naughty women aren't conforming to what the theory of patriarchy demands of them - they still like guys with muscles and money. Remember those three injunctions that Gilmore pointed out were universal: procreate, protect, provide. In this Marie Claire article as well, we have a lady who has a husband who's smart and funny and likes to explain why the Sherlock Holmes tales are more colonialist than patriarchal. She also likes the idea of a stay-at-home husband, but the reality of living it broke her marriage. She says she had neutralised him as a sexual being - "I wanted to be overwhelmed by the sheer power of his masculinity in the bedroom, but I wasn't. Because I felt like the man in our relationship". As Tony Montana said, "first you gotta make the money, then when you get the money you get the power, then when you get the power then you get the women". 

Patriarchy will remain worldwide and history-wide until women start getting men to compete over being weak, cowardly, impotent and poor providers. So rather than oppressing them, the fact that women get men to compete over them gives them tremendous power. Shakespeare scholar Marilyn Simon, in her article "Feminism's Dependency Trap" reminds women that "men adore us, and almost all their efforts at work, or at home, or in a social setting, are made to win our approval, if not our admiration". James Watson for example, Nobel Laureate and author of the Double Helix, said that "almost everything I ever did, even as a scientist, was in the hope of meeting a pretty girl". As James Brown put it, "it's a man's world. But it would mean nothing, nothing without a woman or a girl". This is why chivalry is expected - look at this woman's face after the man she was on a date with suggested that they split the bill. Despite its universality however, cries of "smash the patriarchy" continue, even though this ultimately amounts to saying "smash human nature" and biological reality. And what is the alternative offered anyway? 

Andrea Dworkin, pictured, has been described in the Guardian as recently as 2019 as the "visionary feminist we need in our troubled times". This was her vision: men and women are fictions, caricatures, cultural constructs - unambiguous heterosexual behaviour is the worst betrayal of our common humanity. The destruction of the incest taboo is essential to the development of cooperative human community, based on the free flow of natural androgynous eroticism. The incest taboo can be destroyed only by destroying the nuclear family as the primary institution of culture. As people develop fluid androgynous identities, they will also develop the forms of community appropriate to it. Children are fully capable of participating in community and have every right to live out their own erotic impulses. The distinctions between children and adults, and the social institutions which enforce those distinctions would disappear as androgynous community develops". Attacking the nuclear family then, she advocates incest and pedophilia - not only are the sexes cultural constructs, but so is the distinction between children and adults. It is worth noting here that Simone de Beauvoir, author of "The Second Sex" and founder of modern feminism, signed a petition calling for pedophilia to be decriminalised. 

By contrast, the core of masculinity, the protector role, makes it the antithesis of pedophilia. This is why in prison, child abusers are the most despised offenders. Dworkins wants to destroy patriarchal power at its source, the family, and destroy the structure of culture as we know it. But the family offers numerous benefits, not only to men, but to women and children. Children who live with their own two married parents enjoy better physical and mental health on average, than do children in other family forms. Married women live longer and enjoy better health and lower rates of injury and illness than unmarried women. They are substantially less likely to commit suicide and have lower rates of depression. They are also at lower risk of experiencing domestic violence or being the victim of crime. The Harvard sociologist Karl Zimmerman, in his master work "Family and Civilisation", described childbearing as the main stem of the family - only a man and a woman can bear children. And for as long as childbearing continues, the nuclear family will continue to bury its undertakers. When you look at this picture, what do you see? A woman imprisoned, or a woman provided for and protected?

